>[!definition]
>Let $V$ and $W$ be vector spaces over a field $F$. A linear transformation from $V$ to $W$ is a function $T:V\rightarrow W$ such that for all $v_1,v_2\in V$ and $c\in F$:
>1. $T(v_1+v_2)=T(v_1)+T(v_2)$
>2. $T(cv)=cT(v)$ 
>$T$ is a function over the vector space that preserves the operations (addition and scalar multiplication). We can check both (1.) and (2.) in one step by checking $T(cv+w)=cT(v)+T(w)$.
>$\hspace{1em}$

*Remark*. If $T:V\rightarrow W$ is linear, then $T(\vec0_V)=\vec0_W$. As such, if $T(\vec0_V)\neq\vec0_W$, then $T$ is not linear.

>[!definition]
>Let $T:V\rightarrow W$ be a linear transformation. 
>The **kernel (nullspace)** of $T$ is the set of vectors $v\in V$ such that $T(v)=\vec0_V$.
>$$\ker(T)=N(T)=\{v\in V\mid T(\vec v)=\vec0\}$$
>The **image (range)** of $T$ is the image of $T$ as a function:
>$$\text{im}(T)=R(T)=\{T(v)\mid v\in V\}=\{w\in W\mid T(v)=w\text{ for some }v\in V\}$$

If $T:F^m\rightarrow F^n$ is given by $T(x)=Ax$ for a matrix $A\in M_{n\times m}(F)$ then
- $\ker(T)=\text{nullspace}(A)$
- $\text{im}(T)=\text{column space of }(A)$

>[!theorem]
>Let $T:V\rightarrow W$ be a linear transformation. Then $\ker(T)$ is a subspace of $V$ and $\text{im}(T)$ is a subspace of $W$.

***Proof*:** 
- $\ker T$: $T(\vec0_V)=\vec0_W$ so $\vec0_V\in\ker T$. Let $x,y\in \ker T$ and $c\in F$, then $T(x+y)=T(x)+T(y)=\vec0 + \vec0=\vec0$. $T(cx)=cT(x)=c\vec0=\vec0\implies cx\in\ker T$. Therefore $\ker T$ is a subspace.

>[!theorem]
>Let $T:V\rightarrow W$ be linear and $\beta=\{v_1,\dots,v_n\}$ be a basis for $V$. Then $T(\beta)=\{T(v_1),\dots,T(v_n)\}$ spans $\text{Im}(T)$.

***Proof*:** Clearly $\text{span}T(\beta)\subseteq\text{Im}(T)$. We want to show that $\text{Im}(T)\subseteq\text{span}T(\beta)$. Let $w\in\text{Im}(T)$, then $w=T(v)$ for some $v\in V$. $\beta$ spans $V$, so $v=c_1v_1+\dotsc_nv_n$ for some $c_i\in F$. Then linearity of $T\implies w=T(v)=c_1T(v_1)+\dots+c_nT(v_n)\in \text{span}T(\beta)$. Therefore $\text{Im}(T)\subseteq\text{span}(\beta)\implies\text{span}T(\beta)=\text{Im}(T)$.

>[!definition]
>Let $T:V\rightarrow W$ be a linear transformation. If $\ker(T)$ and $\text{Im}(T)$ are finite dimensional, define the **nullity** of $T$ as $\text{nullity}(T)=\dim(\ker(T))$ and the **rank** of $T$ as $\text{rank}(T)=\dim(\text{Im}(T))$.

>[!theorem] Rank-Nullity Theorem
>Let $T:V\rightarrow W$ be a linear transformation. If $V$ is finite dimensional, then $$\text{nullity}(T)+\text{rank}(T)=\dim(V)$$

***Proof* (Sketch):** $\dim V=n$
$\{v_1,\dots,v_k\}$ is basis of $\ker T$
$\rightarrow$ extend to $\{v_1,\dots,v_k,w_1,\dots,w_{n-k}$ } is basis of $V$ (show that it is linearly independent)
By the previous theorem, $\{T(v_1),\dots,T(v_k),T(w_1),\dots,T(w_{n-k})\}$ spans $\text{Im}(T)$
Removing instances of the zero vector, since $T(v_1),\dots,T(v_k)=\vec0$, we get $\{T(w_1),\dots,T(w_{n-k}\}$ spans $\text{Im}(T)$.

>[!theorem]
>Let $T:V\rightarrow W$ be linear. Then $T$ is injective (one-to-one) if and only if $\ker(T)=\{\vec0\}$.

***Proof*:** $(\implies)$ If $T$ is injective, then by the linearity of $T$, if $T(\vec0)=\vec0$ and $T(x)=T(\vec0)$, then $x=\vec0$, so $\ker T=\{\vec0\}$. $(\impliedby)$ Assume $\ker T=\{\vec0\}$, if $T(v_1)=T(v_2)$, then $\vec0=T(v_1)-T(v_2)=T(v_1-v_2)$ by the linearity of $T$, then $\implies v_1-v_2\in\ker T\implies v_1-v_2=\vec0\implies v_1=v_2$. Hence, $T$ is injective.

>[!theorem]
>For a linear transformation $T:V\rightarrow W$, where $V$ and $W$ are finite dimensional with $\dim V=\dim W$, the following are equivalent:
>1. $T$ is injective
>2. $T$ is surjective
>3. $\text{rank }T=\dim W=\dim V$
>***
>If $T$ is surjective, then $\dim V=\text{nullity} + \text{rank} =\text{nullity}+\dim W$
>$\implies \text{nullity}=\dim V-\dim W=0$

>[!theorem]
>Let $\{v_1,\dots,v_n\}$ be a basis for $V$. Then for any vectors $w_1,\dots,w_n\in W$, there is a **unique linear transformation** $T:V\rightarrow W$ such that $T(v_i)=w_i\forall i$.
>$T$ is determined completely by how it acts on a basis.
