>[!definition]
>If $V$ and $W$ are vector spaces and $T:V\rightarrow W$ is linear, a function $U:W\rightarrow V$ is an **inverse** of $T$ if $T\cdot U=I_W$ and $U\cdot T=I_V$. We say $T$ is **invertible**.
>****
>*Remark*: Invertible is equivalent to **bijective**: both *one-to-one* and *onto*. So we can say
>$$T\text{ invertible}\iff \text{rank}(T)=\dim(T)$$

>[!theorem]
>Let $T:V\rightarrow W$ be a linear transformation. If $T$ is invertible, then $T^{-1}$ is linear.

***Proof:*** $T^{-1}(cx+y)=T^{-1}(cTT^{-1}(x)+TT^{-1}(y))=T^{-1}(T(cT^{-1}(x)+T^{-1}(y))=cT^{-1}(x)+T^{-1}(y)$ using $T^{-1}T=\text{Id}$. Therefore $T^{-1}$ is linear.

Recall that $T:V\rightarrow W$ is invertible if and only if it is both injective and surjective.

>[!theorem]
>If $T:V\rightarrow W$ and $V$, $W$ have bases $\beta$, $\gamma$ respectively, then $T$ is invertible if and only if $[T]^\gamma_\beta$ is invertible. Furthermore, $$[T^{-1}]^\beta_\gamma=([T]^\gamma_\beta)^{-1}$$

***Proof*:** Suppose $T$ is invertible. Then $\dim V=\dim W = n$.
Then $T^{-1}\circ T=\text{Id}_V$, $T\circ T^{-1}=\text{Id}_W$.
$$I_n=[\text{Id}_V]^\beta_\beta=[T^{-1}\circ T]^\beta_\beta=[T^{-1}]^\beta_\gamma[T]^\gamma_\beta$$
$$I_n=[\text{Id}_W]^\gamma_\gamma=[T\circ T^{-1}]^\gamma_\gamma=[T]^\gamma_\beta[T^{-1}]^\beta_\gamma$$
So $I_n=[T^{-1}]^\beta_\gamma[T]^\gamma_\beta=[T]^\gamma_\beta[T^{-1}]^\beta_\gamma$. Therefore, $[T]^\gamma_\beta$ is invertible with inverse $[T^{-1}]^\beta_\gamma$.

Conversely, suppose $A=[T]^\gamma_\beta$ is invertible. Recalling the isomorphism $\phi^\gamma_\beta:\mathcal{L}(V,W)\rightarrow M_{m\times n}(F)$, $T\mapsto [T]^\gamma_\beta$
$A$ invertible $\implies A$  is a square matrix $\implies$ $\dim V=\dim W$
$\phi^\beta_\gamma:\mathcal{L}(W,V)\rightarrow M_{n\times n}(F)$ is surjective.
So there exists $U:W\rightarrow V$ such that $[U]^\beta_\gamma=A^{-1}$.
So $[UT]^\beta_\beta=[U]^\beta_\gamma[T]^\gamma_\beta=I_n$
Since the map $T\mapsto[T]^\beta_\beta$ is an isomorphism, it is injective.
So $[UT]^\beta_\beta=[\text{Id}_V]^\beta_\beta\implies UT=\text{Id}_V$. Likewise $TU=\text{Id}_W$.
Therefore $T$ is invertible.

>[!definition]
>An invertible linear transformation $T:V\rightarrow W$ is called an **isomorphism** of vector spaces.
>****
>Vector spaces $V$ and $W$ are said to be **isomorphic** if there exists an *invertible linear transformation* $T:V\rightarrow W$.

>[!theorem]
>Let $V$ and $W$ be finite dimensional vector spaces over $F$. Then $V\cong W$ if and only if $\dim V= \dim W$.
 $\cong$ : there is an invertible $T: V\rightarrow W$

***Proof:*** $V\cong W\implies \dim V = \dim W$ proven above. To show $\dim V=\dim W\implies V\cong W$:
Suppose $\dim V=\dim W$. Then we have the bases $\beta=\{v_1,\dots,v_n\}$ for $V$ and $\{w_1,\dots,w_n\}$ for $W$. Let $T:V\rightarrow W$ be the unique linear transformation satisfying
$$T(v_1)=w_1, T(v_2)=w_2,\dots,T(v_n)=w_n$$
$\text{Im}T=\text{span}\{T(v_2),T(v_2),\dots,T(v_n)\}=\text{span}(w_1,\dots,w_n\}$

Therefore $T$ is surjective. Then $\dim V=\dim W=n$ and $T$ surjective $\implies$ $T$ injective. Thus $T$ is an isomorphism. $\square$

>[!theorem] Corollary
>Suppose $T:V\rightarrow W$ is an **isomorphism** of vector spaces. Then
>(a) $V$ is finite-dimensional $\iff$ $W$ is finite dimensional
>(b) If $V$ is finite dimensional, then $\dim V=\dim W$

***Proof***: If $V$ is finite dimensional, then there is a finite basis $\{v_1,\dots,v_n\}$ for $V$, so $\{T(v_1),T(v_2),\dots,T(v_n)\}$ spans $\text{Im}(T)=W$. So then $W$ is also finite dimensional. For the converse, replace $T$ with $T^{-1}$.

Given $V$ and $W$ are finite dimensional,
- $T$ is injective $\implies \text{nullity}(T)=0$
- $T$ is surjective $\implies \text{rank}(T)=\dim W$
So from rank-nullity: $\dim V=\text{nullity}(T)+\text{rank}(T)=0+\dim W$, therefore $\dim V = \dim W$. $\square$

>[!theorem]
>Let $V$ be a finite-dimensional vector space with ordered basis $\beta=\{v_1,\dots,v_n\}$. The map $\phi_\beta:V\rightarrow F^n$, defined by $$\phi_\beta(x)=[x]_\beta$$ is an *isomorphism* of vector spaces.

>[!definition]
>$\phi_\beta$ is called **the standard representation for $V$ with respect to $\beta$**.

Let $V$ and $W$ be vector spaces of dimension $n$ and $m$ respectively, and let $T:V\rightarrow W$ be a linear transformation and $A=[T]^\gamma_\beta$, the matrix of $T$ relative to $(\beta,\gamma)$. Then $L_A:F^n\rightarrow F^m$ is the linear transformation mapping corresponding to multiplying by $[T]^\gamma_\beta$.
Then there are two compositions of linear transformations to map $V$ into $F^m$:
$$\begin{cases}(1)\hspace{2em}V\xrightarrow{\phi_\beta}F^n\xrightarrow{[T]^\gamma_\beta}F^m\implies L_A\circ\phi_\beta=L_A\phi_\beta \\ (2)\hspace{2em}V\xrightarrow{T}W\xrightarrow{\phi_\gamma}F^m\implies \phi_\gamma\circ T=\phi_\gamma T\end{cases}$$
$$\boxed{\begin{matrix}
&& && {T} \\
&& V && \longrightarrow && W \\
[\phi]_\beta && (2)\downarrow && && \downarrow (1) && [\phi]_\gamma \\
&& F^n && \longrightarrow && F^m \\
&& && L_A=[T]_\beta^\gamma
\end{matrix}}$$
So we can conclude that 
$$[T]^\gamma_\beta\phi_\beta=\phi_\gamma T$$

>[!theorem]
>Let $\beta=\{v_1,\dots,v_n\}$ and $\gamma=\{w_1,\dots,w_m\}$ be ordered bases for $V$ and $W$ respectively. Then the function $\phi^\gamma_\beta:\mathcal{L}(V,W)\rightarrow M_{m\times n}(F)$ is given by $\phi^\gamma_\beta(T)=[T]^\gamma_\beta$, and is an isomorphism.

***Proof*:** We want to show $[cT+U]^\gamma_\beta=c[T]^\gamma_\beta+[U]^\gamma_\beta$ and that $\phi^\gamma_\beta$ is invertible.
$(cT+U)(v_i)=cT(v_i)+U(v_i)$
$[(cT+U)(v_i)]_\gamma=[cT(v_i)+U(v_i)]_\gamma=c[T(v_i)]_\gamma+[U(v_i)]_\gamma$
So $[cT+U]^\gamma_\beta=c(\text{i-th column of }[T]^\gamma_\beta)+(\text{i-th column of }[U]^\gamma_\beta)$
Therefore $[cT+U]^\gamma_\beta=c[T]^\gamma_\beta+[U]^\gamma_\beta$.
Let $[T]^\gamma_\beta=A$. There is a unique linear transformation $T$ such that
$$T(v_j)=\sum A_{ij}w_i\implies[T]^\gamma_\beta=A$$
If $U(v_j)=\sum A_{ij}w_i$ for all $j$, as well, then $T=U$ by an earlier theorem.
