>[!definition]
>A **function** $f:A\rightarrow B$ from a set $A$ to a set $B$ is a mapping that assigns to each $a\in A$ some *unique* $!\exists$ element $f(a)\in B$.
>$$\forall a\in A, !\exists b\in B: f(a):=b$$
>We can write $a\xrightarrow{f}b$ to indicate $f$ mapping $a$ to $b$.

**Ex.** 
$f:\mathbb{R}\rightarrow\mathbb{R}, f(x)=\sin(x)$
$f:\mathbb{Z}\rightarrow\mathbb{Q},f(z)=\frac{z}{2}+1$

>[!definition]
>Given a function $f:A\rightarrow B$,
>* The set of inputs $A$ is called the **domain** of $f$,
>* The set of outputs $B$ is called the **codomain** of $f$.
>* For any $a\in A$, $f(a)$ is called the **image of $a$** (under $f$).
>* The set $\{ f(a) \mid a\in A\}$ of all the image points is called the **image of $f$**.
>* For $C\subseteq A$, $f(C)=\{ f(x)\mid x\in C\}$ is the image of $C$ (under $f$). For $C=A$, $f(A)=\{f(x)\mid x\in A\}$ is called the **image** of $f$.

Note: Some people use the word *range* for codomain, and some for the image. For this reason we avoid the word *range*.

**Ex.** for $f:\mathbb{Z}\rightarrow\mathbb{Q}, f(z)=\frac{z}{2}+1$, $\text{dom}(f)=\mathbb{Z}$, $\text{codom}(f)=\mathbb{Q}$, and e.g. the image of -3 is $f(-3)=\frac{-3}{2}+1=-\frac{1}{2}$.

Note that while we always have $\text{im}(f)\subseteq \text{codom}(f)$, these don't always have to be equal.

**Ex.** Let's show $\frac{1}{3}\notin \text{im} (f)$ for $f:\mathbb{Z}\rightarrow\mathbb{Q}, f(z)=\frac{z}{2}+1$.
***Proof***: Suppose for the sake of contradiction that $\frac{1}{3}\in\text{im}(f)$. This means there is some integer $z$ with $\frac{1}{3}=f(z)$. This gives $\frac{1}{3}=\frac{z}{2}+1$. Rearranging gives $z=-\frac{4}{3}$. There is no integer $z$ for which this is true, which is a contradiction. Thus $\frac{1}{3}\notin \text{im}(f)$. $\square$

>[!definition]
>Suppose $f:A\rightarrow B$ function. The **preimage** (inverse) of a subset $C\subseteq B$ is 
>$$f^{-1}(C)=\{x\in A \mid f(x)\in C\}$$

Two important properties a function can have:

>[!definition]
>- $f$ is **injective** (one-to-one) if for all $x,y\in\text{dom}(f)$, if $f(x)=f(y)\implies x=y$.
>In other words, every $b\in \text{Im}(f)$ is mapped to by a unique $a\in A$:
> $$\forall b\in \text{Im}(f), !\exists a:f(a)=b$$
> To show injective, the procedure is to show if $f(a_1)=f(a_2)\implies a_1=a_2$.
>- $f$ is **surjective** (onto) if every $z\in\text{codom}(f)$ is the image of some point in the domain, i.e. there is always an $x$ with $z=f(x)$. In other words, $\text{im}(f)=\text{codom}(f)$, or $f(A)=B$.
>$$\forall b\in B, \exists a\in A \text{ such that }f(a)=b$$ 
>To show surjective, you usually have to solve $f(a)=b$ for $a\in A$.
>- If a function is injective and surjective, we say it is **bijective**.

**Ex.** Show $f:\mathbb{Z}\rightarrow \mathbb{Q}$, $f(x)=\frac{x}{3}-1$ is not surjective.
***Proof:*** For contradiction, suppose that it is surjective. Then $\frac{1}{2}\in \text{im}(f) \implies \exists x\in \mathbb{Z}$ such that $f(x)=\frac{1}{2}$, so that $\frac{x}{3}-1=\frac{1}{2}$. But this implies $x=\frac{9}{2}\notin \mathbb{Z}$, contradicting $x\in \mathbb{Z}$. Hence $\frac{1}{2}\notin\text{im}(f)\implies f$ is not surjective. $\square$

**Ex.** Show $f:\mathbb{Z}\rightarrow \mathbb{Q}, f(x)=\frac{x}{3}-1$ is injective.
***Proof:*** Suppose $f(x_1)=f(x_2)$ for some arbitrary $x_1,x_2\in\mathbb{Z}$. Then $\frac{x_1}{3}-1=\frac{x_2}{3}-1\implies x_1=x_2$. As such, $f(x_1)=f(x_2)\implies x_1=x_2$, so $f$ is injective. $\square$

**Ex.** Show $g:\mathbb{R}\rightarrow\mathbb{R}$ given by $g(x)=\frac{x}{3}-1$ is surjective.
***Proof***: For an arbitrary $y\in \mathbb{R}$ (codomain), show that $\exists x\in \mathbb{R}$ (domain) such that $g(x)=y$.
...

**Ex.** Let $f:\mathbb{R}\rightarrow\mathbb{R}$ given by $f(x)=x^2+2x+3$
- What is $\text{Im}(f)$?
Completing the square, $f(x)=(x+1)^2+2$, the function attains all $\mathbb{R}$ that are $\geq 2$. Therefore $\text{Im}(f)=[2,\infty)$.

- If I restrict $f:[-2,2]\rightarrow\mathbb{R}$, find $\text{Im}(f)$.
$\text{Im}(f)=[2,11]$

**Ex.** Find an injective map from $\mathbb{N}\times\mathbb{N}\rightarrow\mathbb{N}$. $(\mathbb{N}\times\mathbb{N}=\{(a,b):a,b\in \mathbb{N}\}), \mathbb{N}=\{1,2,3,4\}$
$f(a,b)=2^a3^b$

>[!definition]
>One way to construct more complicated functions is by **composition:**
>Given $f:A\rightarrow B, g:B\rightarrow C$, we can form the composition
>$$(g\circ f)(a)=g(f(a))$$

***Exercise (HW):*** Let $g:B\rightarrow C, f:A\rightarrow B$
- Show that if $g\circ f$ is injective, then $f$ is injective.
- Show if $g\circ f$ is surjective, then $g$ is surjective.

>[!definition]
>$f: A\rightarrow B$ is **invertible** if and only if $\exists g:B\rightarrow A$ such that $g\circ f=\text{id}A$ (**identity** on A; fct that maps every element in A to itself) and $f\circ g=\text{id}B$.
>Equivalently, $f$ is invertible if it is both injective and surjective.

