# Graph traversals
**s-t connectivity problem.** Given two nodes $s$ and $t$, is there a path between $s$ and $t$?

**s-t shortest path problem.** Given two nodes $s$ and $t$, what is the length of a shortest path between $s$ and $t$?

## Breadth-first search
We explore outward from $s$ (source) in all possible directions, adding nodes one layer at a time.
BFS finds the shortest path between the source $s$ and every other vertex in the graph.
The **distance** between vertices $s$ and $t$ is the minimum number of edges on a path between $s$ and $t$.
### Algorithm
Data structure: Queue (First in, first out)
BFS(s):
- Mark `s` as discovered and all other vertices as undiscovered.
- Set `List[0]={s}` and `i=0`.
- While `List[i]` is not empty,
	- Make `List[i+1]` be the empty list
	- For all vertices `u` on `List[i]`,
		- For all neighbors `v` of `u`,
			- If `v` is undiscovered,
				- Mark `v` as discovered.
				- Add `v` to `List[i+1]`.
	- Increment `i++`.
### Properties
**Thm.** For each $i$, layer $L_i$ consists of all nodes at a distance of $i$ from the source node $s$. There is a path from $s$ to $t$ if and only if $t$ appears in some layer.

**Property.** Let $T$ be a BFS tree of $G=(V,E)$ and let $(x,y)$ be an edge of $G$. Then the levels of $x$ and $y$ differ by at most 1.

*Pf.* Proof by contradiction. Negation: Let the level of $x$ be $i$ and the level of $y$ be $j$. $T$ is the BFS tree of $G$, $(x,y)\in E$, and the levels of $x$ and $y$ differ by more than 1. Consider the $i<j-1$ case, since both cases are symmetric.
- When $x$ is discovered, BFS considers neighbors of $x$. Since $(x,y)\in E$, $y$ is a neighbor of $x$. 
- Two cases:
	1) Case: $y$ is already discovered. Then $j\leq i+1$: Contradiction
		1) Case: $y$ was discovered before $x$ $(j<i)$
		2) Case: $y$ and $x$ were discovered at the same time $(j=i)$
		3) Case: $y$ was discovered by a neighbor of $x$ on the same level $(j=i+1)$
	2) Case: $y$ is discovered through $x$. Then $j=i+1$: Contradiction
- In either case we get a contradiction.

### Runtime analysis
**Thm.** The above implementation of BFS runs in $O(m+n)$ time if the graph is given by its adjacency representation.

*Pf.* To prove $O(n^2)$ running time:
- At most $n$ lists
- Each node occurs in at most one list, so for loop runs $\leq n$ times
- When we consider node $u$, there are $\leq n$ incident edges $(u,v)$, and we process each edge in $O(1)$.

*Pf.* Tighter bound: $O(m+n)$
Let $m=|E|$ be the number of edges, and $n=|V|$ be the number of vertices.
Define:
$$T(n,m)=c_0n+\sum_{L_i}^{\text{(1)}}\sum_{u\in L_i}^{(2)}\left[ c_{10}+\sum_{j=1}^{d(u)}c_{11}\right]$$
Where:
- Loop (1): While next layer is not empty
- Loop (2): For all vertices $u$ of the layer
- Loop (3): For all neighbors of $u$
Note that since each node appears in only one layer, (1) and (2) can be combined into a summation over all vertices in the graph:
$$\begin{align}T(n,m)&=c_0n+\sum_{u\in 
V}\left[c_{10}+\sum_{j=1}^{d(u)}c_{11}\right]\\&=c_0n+\sum_{u\in V}c_{10}+\sum_{u\in V}\sum_{j=1}^{d(u)}c_{11}\\&=c_0n+c_{10}n+\sum_{u\in V}c_{11}d(u)\end{align}$$
Now by the Handshaking Lemma, the sum of the degrees of all vertices in the graph is twice the number of edges, $\sum_{u\in V}d(u)=2m$:
$$T(n,m)=c_n+c_{10}n+ 2c_{11}m=O(m+n)$$
## Depth-first search
Data structure: Stack
DFS(s):
- Mark all vertices as undiscovered.
- Initialize `stack` to only contain `s`.
- While `stack` is not empty,
	- Pop the stack, call it `u`
	- If `u` is undiscovered,
		- Mark `u` as discovered.
		- For all of `u`'s neighbors `v`,
			- Push `v` onto the stack.

Note that while BFS always finds the shortest path from the source to each node, DFS does not have this same guarantee.

The runtime of DFS is $O(|V|+|E|)$.

In a DFS tree, nodes in different branches are not connected in the original graph.
## Connected components
*Proof strategy: Shrink down, build up*
1. Start from $G$, a graph such that the premise for the inductive step holds
2. Perform graph operations on $G$ to shrink it to $G'$, a smaller graph
3. Use the inductive hypothesis to assert that the claim holds for $G'$
4. Construct $G$ from $G'$, and use the claim holding on $G'$ to show that it also holds for $G$ in the inductive step.
****
**Connected component.** All nodes reachable from $s$
- Flood fill is one application of connected components, e.g. given a certain color of a pixel in an image, change the color of all connected pixels.

**Thm.** Every graph with $v$ vertices and $e$ edges has at least $v-e$ connected components.

*Pf.* Proof by induction over the number of edges.
- Base case: $P(0)$: Every graph with $v$ vertices and 0 edges has at least $v$ connected components. Every vertex is a connected component, so the claim holds.
- Assume the claim holds for some fixed arbitrary number of edges $k\geq0$, $P(k)$: A graph with $v$ vertices and $k$ edges has at least $v-k$ connected components.
- Show the claim holds for a graph with $v$ vertices and $k+1$ edges. 
	- Let $G$ be a graph with $v$ vertices and $k+1$ edges.
	- Remove any edge $e^*$ and consider $G'=(V,E-e^*)$ with $|V|=v$ and $|E-e^*|=k$.
	- By the inductive hypothesis, $G'$ has at least $v-k$  connected components. 
	- Now add the edge back to reconstruct $G$.
		- Case 1: Both endpoints of $e^*$ are in the same connected component of $G'$.
			- The number of connected components remains the same, so $G$ has at least $v-k$.
		- Case 2: The endpoints of $e^*$ are in two different connected components, creating a combined connected component.
			- $G$ has $v-k-1=v-(k+1)$ connected components.  
	- In both cases the claim holds.

We can discover the connected component of $s$ by using BFS or DFS starting from $s$.
- $R$ consists of all nodes to which $s$ has a path.
- Initially $R=\{s\}$.
- While there is an edge $(u,v)$ where $u\in R$ and $v\not\in R$,
	- Add $v$ to $R$.
We can find all the connected components of a graph by repeatedly running BFS/DFS and then subtracting the found connected component $R$, and repeating.