# 9.1 Introduction
## Motivation
Consider the quadratic
$$f(x)=\frac{1}{2}x^\top Qx-b^\top x$$
- Gradient: $\nabla f(x)=Qx-b$
- Hessian: $D^2f(x)=Q$
If $Q$ has very different eigenvalues, then the condition number $r$ is large, i.e.
$$r=\frac{\lambda_\max(D_{x^*}^2f)}{\lambda_\min(D_{x^*}^2f)}\gg1$$
Level sets are *elongated ellipses* (eccentric), and gradient descent moves in a zig-zagging way, thus convergence is very slow in the more *stretched* regions.
****
Assuming $Q$ is symmetric, it can be diagonalized: 
$$Q=V\Lambda V^\top\quad $$
where the columns of $V$ are the eigenvectors of $Q$ and $\Lambda$ consists of the eigenvalues. We can partition the eigenvectors into two groups,
$$V=\begin{bmatrix}V_\max&V_\min\end{bmatrix}$$
which allows us to express $Q$ as scaling in two directions (large eigenvalues give a steeper direction, small eigenvalues give a flatter direction. In normal gradient descent all directions are treated the same, which creates issues).
$$Q=\lambda_\max V_\max V_\max^\top +\lambda_\min V_\min V_\min^\top$$
For the quadratic $f(x)$, 
$$\nabla f(x)=Qx-b$$
The minimizer thus lies at $x^*=Q^{-1}b$. The ideal update step is
$$x^1=x^0-Q^{-1}\nabla f(x^0)$$
In other words, for any quadratic $f$ with $b\ne0$,
$$x^1=x^0-Q^{-1}\nabla f(x^0)=x^0-(x^0-Q^{-1}b)=Q^{-1}b$$
Which is exactly the minimizer $x^*$. Thus we converge in 1 iteration.
****
Gradient descent only uses first-order information (slope). This ideal step uses second-order information in the curvature of $Q$. This motivates Newton's method.
## Newton's method
Attempt at generalizing. Approximate a more general $f$ (not necessarily quadratic) up to the second order term,
$$f(x)\approx f(x^0)+(x-x^0)^\top\nabla f(x^0)+\frac{1}{2}(x-x^0)^\top D_{x^0}^2f(x-x^0)=q(x)$$
The $D_x^2$ is called the Hessian. To minimize $q$, we will find $x$ such that $\nabla q(x)=0$. We want
$$0=\nabla f(x^0)+D^2_{x^0}f(x-x^0)$$
$$\implies x-x^0=-(D_{x^0}^2f)^{-1}\nabla f(x^0)$$
Thus we get our update step:
$$x=x^0-(D_{x^0}^2f)^{-1}\nabla f(x^0)$$
****
**Newton's method.**
$$x^{k+1}=x^k-(D^2f(x^k))^{-1}\nabla f(x^k)$$
****
Since $Q^{-1}=V\Lambda^{-1}V^\top$, we end up rescaling based on the magnitude of each eigenvector, dividing by $\lambda$ in each eigen-direction.
- Large $\lambda$ (steep direction) has a large gradient, so dividing by large $\lambda$ shrinks the step in that direction
- Small $\lambda$ (flat direction) has a small gradient, so dividing by small $\lambda$ amplifies the step.
Newton’s method balances all directions by dividing by curvature, undos the distortion caused by $Q$.

*Rm.* We need $D_{x^k}^2f$ to be invertible and positive-definite.

Newton's method needs an efficient way for solving linear systems. This can be limiting in high-dimensions.
# 9.2 Analysis of Newton's method
*When does Newton's method converge?*
Newton's method requires thst $D^2f(x^k)>0$. However, even with a positive-definite $Q$ we don't have the guarantee that
$$f(x^{k+1})<f(x^k)$$
Recall the Newton's method for a quadratic will always converge in one step:
$$\nabla f(x)=Qx-b\implies F(x)=Q$$
Then $x^1=x^0-F(x^0)^{-1}\nabla f(x^0)=Q^{-1}b=x^*$, and we say the order of convergence if $\infty$.
****
**Thm.** Suppose $f\in C^3$ and $x^*\in\mathbb{R}^n$ such that $\nabla f(x^*)=0$ and $D^2f(x^*)$ is invertible. Then for all $x^0$ sufficiently close to $x^*$, Newton's method is well-defined for all $k$ and converges to $x^*$ with order at least 2.
*Pf.* Observe that the Taylor series expansion of $\nabla f$ about $x^0$ gives
$$\nabla f(x)-f(x^0)-F(x^0)(x-x^0)=O(\|x-x^0\|^2)$$
Then there must exist $\varepsilon,c_1,c_2>0$ such that for all $x^0,x\in\|x-x^*\|\le\varepsilon$, we have
$$\|\nabla f(x)-\nabla f(x^0)-F(x^0)(x-x^0)\|\le c_1\|x-x^0\|^2$$
Thus $F(x)^{-1}$ exists and satisfies $\|F(x)^{-1}\|\le c_2$.
($F$ is the Jacobian, same thing as the Hessian which is represented as $D^2$)
Observe
$$\|x^1-x^*\|=\|x^0-x^*-(D^2f(x^0))^{-1}\nabla f(x^0)\|$$
$$=\|D^2f(x^0)^{-1}(D^2f(x^0)(x^0-x^*)-\nabla f(x^0))\|$$
$$\le\|D^2f(x^0)^{-1}\|\cdot\|D^2f(x^0)(x^0-x^*)-\nabla f(x^0)\|$$
which is ideally bound by $C\cdot\|x^0-x^*\|^P$. Beat A10 Necro on slay the spire 2 finish proof later
****
**Thm.** Let $(x^k)$ be a sequence generated by Newton's method. If$D^2f(x^k)>0$ and $\nabla f(x^k)\ne0$ for all $k$, then
$$d^k:=-(D^2f(x^k))^{-1}\nabla f(x^k)$$
is a descent direction, e.g. there exists an $\alpha$ such that $f(x^k-\alpha d^k)<f(x^k)$.

In other words, a 1D line search can stabilize Newton's method.
Modified Newton's method:
$$x^{k+1}=x^k-\alpha_k(D^2f(x^k))^{-1}\nabla f(x^k)$$
where
$$\alpha_k=\arg\min_{\alpha\ge0}f(x^{(k)}-\alpha D^2f(x^{(k)})^{-1}f(x^{(k)}))$$
# 9.3 Levenberg-Marquardt Modification
The Levenberg-Marquardt modification ensures that the search direction always points in the descent direction, even when the Hessian matrix may not be positive definite. 
$$x^{(k+1)}=x^{(k)}-(F(x^{(k)})+\mu_k I)^{-1}g^{(k)}$$
where $\mu_k\ge0$. If $\mu_k$ is sufficiently large ($\mu>-\min(0,\lambda_\min)\ge0$) then all eigenvalues $\lambda_i+\mu$ are positive and then $G=(F+\mu I)v_i$ is positive definite.
***
$$\|d^k\|\le\frac{1}{\lambda_\min+\mu}\|\nabla f(x^k)\|\quad\text{for }\mu>-\min(0,\lambda_\min)$$
So for $\mu\to\infty$, $\|d^k\|\to0$.
****
In other words,
- As $\mu_k\to0$, the behavior approaches the pure Newton's method
- As $\mu_k\to\infty$, the behavior approaches a pure gradient method with small step size
In practice we want to choose $\mu_k$ such that $f(x^{k+1})<f(x^k)$, similar to modified Newton's method.

# 9.4 Newton's method for nonlinear least squares
## Gauss-Newton method
**Nonlinear least-squares problem.** Consider the following type of optmization problem:
$$\text{minimize}\quad\sum_{i=1}^m(r_i(x))^2$$
where $r_i:\mathbb{R}^n\to\mathbb{R}$, $i=1,\dots,m$ are given functions. We can rewrite
$$f(x)=r(x)^\top r(x)$$
where we define $r:\mathbb{R}^2\to\mathbb{R}^m$ such that $r=[r_1,\dots,r_m]^\top$, $(r(x))_i=r_i(x)=1,\dots,m$.

To apply Newton's method we need the gradient and the Hessian. The $j$-th component of $\nabla f(x)$ is
$$(\nabla f(x))_j=\frac{\partial}{\partial x_j}f(x)=2\sum_{i}^mr_i(x)\frac{\partial}{\partial x_j}r_i(x)$$
or alternatively in matrix notation, where $Dr(x)^\top$ is the Jacobian matrix:
$$\nabla f(x)=2\nabla r(x)^\top r(x)$$
For the Hessian,
$$D^2f(x)=2\sum_{i=1}^mr_i(x)D^2r_i(x)+2Dr(x)^\top Dr(x)$$
Let $S(x)$ be the matrix whose $(k,j)$-th component is
$$\sum_{i=1}^mr_i(x)\frac{\partial^2}{\partial x_k\partial x_j}r_i(x)$$
Then we can write the Hessian as
$$F(x)=2(\nabla r(x)^\top \nabla r(x)+S(x))$$
In some applications, terms of $S(x)$ become negligibly small, and Newton's method reduces to
$$x^{(k+1)}=x^{(k)}-(\nabla r(x)^\top\nabla r(x))^{-1}\nabla r(x)^\top r(x)$$
****
**Gauss-Newton method.**
$$x^{k+1}=x^k-(\nabla r(x^k)^\top \nabla r(x^k))^{-1}\nabla r(x^k)^\top r(x^k)$$
This method does not use second-order derivatives. Also, the matrix $\nabla r(x^k)^\top \nabla r(x^k)$ is always positive semidefinite.
To ensure positive definiteness, we can use ideas from Levenberg-Marquardt,
$$x^{k+1}=x^k-(\nabla r(x)^\top \nabla r(x)+\mu I )^{-1}\nabla r(x)^\top r(x)$$
