Linear algebra is about studying linear systems, e.g. find the solutions of
$$
\begin{pmatrix} 1 & 4 & -3 \\ 2 & 1 & 2 \end{pmatrix}
\begin{pmatrix}x\\y\\z\end{pmatrix}
=\begin{pmatrix}1\\3\end{pmatrix}
$$
The objects $\begin{pmatrix}x\\y\\z\end{pmatrix}$ and $\begin{pmatrix}1\\3\end{pmatrix}$ are examples **of** **vectors**.
### Two important properties for linear algebra
* Two vectors (of the same kind) can be added
* Vectors can be scaled by numbers
# Fields
 >[!definition]
>A field is a set $F$  with rules for addition and multiplication (two binary operations):
>- **Addition ($+$)**: $F\times F\rightarrow F$, $(a,b)\rightarrow a+b$
>- **Multiplication ($\cdot$) **$: (a,b)\rightarrow ab$
>****
>Satisfying the following axioms $\forall a,b,c \in F$:
>1. **Associative** $$(a+b)+c=a+(b+c)$$ $$(ab)c=a(bc)$$
>2. **Commutative** $$a+b=b+a \text{ and } ab=ba$$ $$ab=ba$$
>3. There exist special elements $0,1\in F$ with $0\neq 1$ such that for all $a$, $$a+0=a \text{ and } a\cdot 1=a$$
>4. **Inverses** $$\forall a\in F, \text{ there is a } b\in F \text{ such that } a+b=0$$ and $$\forall a\neq 0\in F \text{ there is a } b\in F \text{ such that } ab=1$$
>5. **Distributive** $$a(b+c)=ab+ac$$ $$(a+b)c=ac+bc$$

**Ex.** $\mathbb{R},\mathbb{Q},\mathbb{C}$ (complex numbers)
$\mathbb{Z}$ is not a field: there are no inverses for multiplication for $x\neq \pm 1$ (can't divide to output an integer), e.g. there is no integer with $2x=1$

**Ex.** Prove that $\mathbb{Q}[\sqrt{2}]=\{a+b\sqrt2\mid a,b\in\mathbb{Q}\}$ is a field.
***Proof***: 
(1) Show it is closed under addition and multiplication. For any $a+b\sqrt2, c+d\sqrt2\in\mathbb{Q}[\sqrt{2}]$, $a,b,c,d\in \mathbb{Q}$, $$(a+b\sqrt2)+(c+d\sqrt2)=(a+c)+(b+d)\sqrt2\in\mathbb{Q}[\sqrt2]$$ since $(a+c)\in\mathbb{Q}$ and $(b+d)\in\mathbb{Q}$. Also, $$(a+b\sqrt2)\cdot (c+d\sqrt2)=(ac+2bd)+(ad+bc)\sqrt2\in\mathbb{Q}[\sqrt2]$$ since $(ac+2bd)\in\mathbb{Q}$ and $(ad+bc)\in\mathbb{Q}$.

(2) Check axioms
1. $a+b=b+a$ and $ab=ba$
2. $a+(b+c)=(a+b)+c$ and $a(bc)=(ab)c$
Because $\mathbb{Q}[\sqrt2]\subseteq\mathbb{R}$, and $\mathbb{R}$ is also a field, the first two are automatically true.

3. Existence of $0_\mathbb{R}$ and $1_\mathbb{R}$
(i) $0_R+(a+b\sqrt2)=a+b\sqrt2\in \mathbb{Q}[\sqrt{2}]\subseteq \mathbb{R}$, $1_R(a+b\sqrt2)=a+b\sqrt2\in\mathbb{Q}[\sqrt2]\subseteq\mathbb{R}$
(ii) $0_R=0+0\sqrt2\in\mathbb{Q}[\sqrt2]$, $1_R=1+0\sqrt2\in\mathbb{Q}[\sqrt2]$

4. Additive and multiplicative inverses
For $a+b\sqrt2\in\mathbb{Q}[\sqrt2]$ with $a+b\sqrt2\neq 0$
additive inverse = $(-a)+(-b)\sqrt2\in\mathbb{Q}[\sqrt2]$ since $-a,-b\in\mathbb{Q}$
multiplicative inverse = $\frac{1}{a+b\sqrt2}=\frac{a-b\sqrt2}{a^2-2b^2}=\frac{a}{a^2-2b^2}+\frac{b}{a^2-2b^2}\sqrt2\in\mathbb{Q}[\sqrt2]$ since $\frac{a}{a^2-2b^2},\frac{b}{a^2-2b^2}\in\mathbb{Q}$

5. Distributive properties
Follows from $\mathbb{Q}[\sqrt2]\subseteq\mathbb{R}$

We have shown that $\mathbb{Q}[\sqrt2]$ is a field. $\square$

**Ex.** $F_2=\{0,1\}$ under mod2 arithmetic is a field

| +     | 0   | 1   |
| ----- | --- | --- |
| **0** | 0   | 1   |
| **1** | 1   | 0   |

| $\cdot$ | 0   | 1   |
| ------- | --- | --- |
| **0**   | 0   | 0   |
| **1**   | 0   | 1   |
(1) Show it is closed under addition and multiplication
According to the tables you can add and multiply and the result will always be in the field.

(2) Axioms
1. $a+b=b+a$, $ab=ba$
Proved by the tables because they are symmetric

2. $a+(b+c)=(a+b)+c$ and $a(bc)=(ab)c$
Use the tables and show every possible choice of $a,b,c\in F_2$ satisfies this axiom

3. Existence of $0_{F_2}$ and $1_{F_2}$
There are only two elements, 0 and 1. 0 is the additive identity and 1 is the multiplicative identity. This can be shown using the tables

4. Existence of additive (add to 0) and multiplicative (multiply to 1) inverses
For 0, $0+0=0$ 
For 1, $1+1=0$ and $1\cdot 1=1$

5. Distributive properties
Follow from definition tables $\square$

**Remark:** $F_p=\{0,1,\dots ,p-1\}$ is a field under $\text{mod }p$ arithmetic is $p$ is a prime.

**Ex.**
$\mathbb{Z}[\sqrt2]$ does not have a guaranteed multiplicative inverse because dividing integers does not guarantee an integer (unlike for rational numbers $\mathbb{Q}$).

$\mathbb{R}^{2\times 2}$ is not a field because $AB\neq BA$ and $A^{-1}$ is not guaranteed.

$F_4=\{0,1,2,3\}$ under mod 4 is not a field

| +   | 0   | 1   | 2   | 3   |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| **0**   | 0   | 1   | 2   | 3   |
| **1**   | 1   | 2   | 3   | 0   |
| **2**   | 2   | 3   | 0   | 1   |
| **3**   | 3   | 0   | 1   | 2   |

| *     | 0   | 1   | 2   | 3   |
| ----- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| **0** | 0   | 0   | 0   | 0   |
| **1** | 0   | 1   | 2   | 3   |
| **2** | 0   | 2   | 0   | 2   |
| **3** | 0   | 3   | 2   | 1   |
2 has no multiplicative inverse.


>[!theorem]
>**Cancellation theorem**
>Let $F$ be a field. $\forall a,b,c\in F$,
>1. $a+b=a+c$, then $b=c$
>2. If $b\neq 0$ and $ab=cb$, then $a=c$
>These are a consequence of uniqueness of additive/multiplicative identities and inverses.

**Proof for multiplication (2)**
Since $b\neq 0$, then $\exists d$ such that $bd=1$.
So if $ab=cb$, then $(ab)d=a$ and $(cb)d=c$.
Then $a(bd)=c(bd)=c \implies a=c$.

>[!theorem] Identity uniqueness
>The elements $0$ and $1\in F$ are unique.
>**Cor. 1** The multiplicative identity $1$ is unique ($1\in F$ such that $a\cdot 1=a$ for all $a$).
>**Cor. 2** Likewise, the additive identity $0$ is unique.

***Proof*: Cor. 1** If $1$ and $1'$ are both multiplicative identities then $1\cdot 1'=1$ and $1\cdot 1' = 1'\implies 1=1'$.

>[!theorem] Inverse uniqueness
>**Cor. 1** Let $b\in F\setminus\{0\}$. Then the multiplicative inverse of $b$ is unique: $b^-1$.
>**Cor. 2** Similarly, $\forall a\in F$ there exists a unique $-a\in F$ such that $a+(-a)=0$.

***Proof:*** Suppose $d_1$ and $d_2$ satisfy $bd_1=1$, $bd_2=1$. Then $(bd_1)d_2=d_2$ and $$d_2=(bd_1)d_2=b(d_1d_2)=b(d_2d_1)=(bd_2)d_1=d_1$$
>[!theorem]
>Some more properties: $\forall a,b\in F$,
>- $a\cdot 0=0$
>- $a(-b)=(-a)b=-(ab)$
>- $(-a)(-b)=ab$

**Proposition.** $-(-a)=a$ and $(a^{-1})^{-1}=a$
**Proof:** For $-(-a)=a$, we have $-(-a)+(-a)=0$ and $(-a)+a=0$. By the uniqueness of the additive inverse, $a=-(-a)$.

**Prop:** $(-a)b=a(-b)=-(ab)$ for $a,b\in F$.
**Proof:** $ab+(-a)b=(a+(-a))b=0\cdot b=0$, and similarly we can get $ab+a(-b)=0$. $ab+(-ab)=0$ by the definition of an additive inverse. So by the uniqueness of the additive inverse, $(-a)b=a(-b)=(-ab)$.

>[!definition]
>The **characteristic** of a field $F$ is the smallest integer $p$ such that
>$1+1+\dots +1=0$ ($p$ copies of 1)
>If no such integer exists, then we say the characteristic is 0.

**Ex.** $\mathbb{Z}_2=\{0,1\}$ with $0=$ additive identity, $1=$ multiplicative identity
$1+1=0$
This is a field of characteristic 2.

# Vector spaces
>[!definition]
>A **vector space** over a field $F$ in a set $V$ (whose elements are called **vectors**) together with two operations (functions):
>- $+$: $V\times V\rightarrow V$
>	ex. $\times (\vec{v}, \vec{w})=\vec{v}+\vec{w}$
>	adding two vectors outputs a vector
>- $\cdot$: $F\times V\rightarrow V$
>	ex. $\cdot (a,\vec{v})=a\cdot \vec{v}$
>	number and vector outputs a vector

**Note:** for "functions" with multiple inputs, like addition: {pairs of vectors} $\rightarrow$ {vector}
$A\times B$ is the same as $(a,b)$

>[!theorem] Properties of vector spaces (VS)
>$\forall \vec{x},\vec{y},\vec{z}\in V$
>1. $\vec{x}+\vec{y}=\vec{y}+\vec{x}$ (commutative addition)
>2. $(\vec{x}+\vec{y})+\vec{z}=\vec{x}+(\vec{y}+\vec{z})$ (associative addition)
>3. There exists an element $\vec{0}\in V$ such that $\vec{x}+\vec{0}=\vec{x}$ for all $\vec{x}\in V$. (zero vector)
>4. For all $x\in V$ there exists $\vec{u}\in V$ such that $\vec{x}+\vec{u}=\vec0$ (additive inverse)
>5. $1\cdot \vec{x}=\vec{x}$ (multiplicative identity)
>6. For each pair of elements $a,b\in F$ and $\vec{v}\in V$, $a(b\vec{v})=(ab)\vec{v}$ (associativity of scalar multiplication)
>7. For all $a\in F$, $a(\vec{x}+\vec{y})=a\vec{x}+a\vec{y}$ (distributive)
>8. For all $a,b\in F$, $(a+b)\vec{x}=a\vec{x}+b\vec{x}$ (distributive)

**Ex. of vector spaces**
- Polynomials with coefficients from any field $F$
- Differentiable polynomials over $\mathbb{R}$
- $\mathbb{C}$ is a vector space over $\mathbb{R}$

**Q:** Is $\mathbb{R}^n$ a vector space over $\mathbb{C}$?
No, $(1\dots 1)\in \mathbb{R}^n$ but $i\cdot (1\dots 1)\notin \mathbb{R}^n$ (not closed under scalar multiplication)

**Q:** $V=\{(a,b):a,b\in \mathbb{R}\}$ over field $\mathbb{R}$
- Addition defined as $(a,b)+(c,d)=(a+2c,b+4d)$
- Scalar multiplication defined as $\lambda(a,b)=(\lambda a,\lambda b)$
Is $V$ a vector space?
$v_1=(a_1,b_1)$, $v_2=(a_2,b_2)$
Check: $v_1+v_2=v_2+v_1$
$v_1+v_2=(a_1,b_1)+(a_2,b_2)=(a_1+2a_2,b_2+4b_2)$
$v_2+v_1=(a_2,b_2)+(a_1,b_1)=(a_2+2a_1,b_2+4b_1)$
$v_1+v_2\neq v_2+v_1$, which contradicts the first axiom (VS1), so $v$ is not a vector space.

**Q:** $V=\{(a,b):a,b\in \mathbb{R}\}$ over $\mathbb{R}$.
Addition defined as $(a,b)+(c,d)=(a+c,bd)$
Scalar multiplication defined as $\lambda (a,b)=(\lambda a,b)$
Is $V$ a vector space?
VS1, VS2 are true, VS3: $\vec0=(0,1)$
VS4: $(a,b)+(c,d)=(a+c,bd)=(0,1)\implies c=-a,d=b^{-1}$
However, if $b=0$, ex. $(a,0)\in\mathbb{R}^2$ does not have an additive inverse, so $V$ is not a vector space.

**Q:** $V$ and $W$ are vector spaces over the same field $F$ and $Z=\{v+w:v\in V, w\in W\}$ over $F$. Is $Z$ a vector space?
VS1, VS2 are true
VS3: $\vec0_Z=\vec0_V+\vec0_W\implies (v+w)+(0_V+0_W)=v+w$
VS5: $1_F(v+w)=1_FV+1_FW=v+w$

$Z$ is called the **direct sum of $V$ and $W$**: $Z=V\oplus W$
- $\mathbb{R}^2$ is the direct sum of the x- and y-axes
- $\mathbb{R}^n=\mathbb{R}\oplus\mathbb{R}\oplus\dots\oplus\mathbb{R}$


**Ex.** For a field $F$, $F^n=\{\text{n-tuples}\begin{pmatrix}u_1 \\ \vdots \\ u_n\end{pmatrix}\mid u_1\in F\}$,
with addition defined component-wise $\begin{pmatrix}u_1 \\ \vdots \\ u_n\end{pmatrix}+\begin{pmatrix}w_1 \\ \vdots \\ w_n\end{pmatrix}=\begin{pmatrix}u_1+w_1 \\ \vdots \\ u_n+w_n\end{pmatrix}$
and scalar multiplication defined by $c\begin{pmatrix}u_1 \\ \vdots \\ u_n\end{pmatrix}=\begin{pmatrix}cu_1 \\ \vdots \\ cu_n\end{pmatrix}$
$F^n$ is a vector space over $F$.

$\mathbb{R}^3=\{\begin{pmatrix}a \\ b \\ c\end{pmatrix}\mid a,b,c\in\mathbb{R}\}$ is a vector space over $\mathbb{R}$

**Ex.** $M_{m\times n}(F)=m\times n$ matrices with entries in field $F$ = $\{\begin{pmatrix}m_{11} & \dots & a_{1n}\\ \vdots & & \vdots \\ a_{m1} & \dots & a_{mn}\end{pmatrix}\mid a_{ij}\in F\}$
Addition is matrix addition: $(A+B)_{ij}=A_{ij}+B_{ij}$
Scalar multiplication: $(cA)_{ij}=cA_{ij}$


**Ex.** $F[x]=\{\text{Polynomials with coefficients in F}\}$ with the expected operations is a vector space over $F$.

**Ex.** $P_n(F)=\{\text{Polynomials of degree }\leq n\text{ with coefficients in }F\}$ is a vector space.

>[!theorem] Cancellation Theorem
>If $\vec{x},\vec{y},\vec{z}$ are vectors in a vector space $V$ such that if $x+z=y+z$, then $x=y$.
>

***Proof*:** By VS4 there is a $\vec{w}\in V$ such that $\vec{z}+\vec{w}=\vec{0}$. Then by VS2 and VS3, we have $(x+z)+w=x+(z+w)=x+0=x$ and $(y+z)+w=y+(z+w)=y+0=y$ so $x=(x+z)+w=(y+z)+w=y$. $\square$

>[!theorem]
>The zero vector $\vec{0}$ of a vector space $V$ is unique.

***Proof:*** If $\vec{0}_1$ and $\vec{0}_2$ are both zero vectors then $0_1 = 0_1 + 0_2 = 0_2$, so $0_1=0_2$. $\square$

>[!theorem]
>For all $x\in V$ there is a **unique** $y\in V$ such that $x+y=\vec{0}$.

***Proof:*** If $y_1$ and $y_2$ are both additive inverses of $x$, then $x+y_1=x+y_2=\vec{0}$, so $y_1=y_2$ by cancellation. $\square$

>[!definition]
>The **additive inverse** of $\vec{x}$ is written $-\vec{x}$.

>[!theorem]
>1. $0\cdot\vec{x}=\vec{0}$ for any $0\in F, \vec{x}\in V, \vec{0}\in V$
>2. $a\cdot\vec{0}=\vec{0}$ for all $a\in F$
>3. $(-a)\vec{x}=-(a\vec{x})=a\cdot(-\vec{x})$ for all $a\in F$, $\vec{x}\in V$

***Proof:*** $\vec{0}+0\vec{x}=0\vec{x}=(0+0)\vec{x}=0\vec{x}+0\vec{x}$. So $\vec{0}=0\vec{x}$ by cancellation.
### Examples of vector spaces
**Ex.** $F$ is a field, $F=\mathbb{R,Q,C}, F^n=\{(x_1,\dots ,x_n):x_i\in F\}$ where $(x_1,x_2,\dots ,x_n)+(y_1,\dots ,y_n)=(x_1+y_1,x_2+y_2,\dots ,x_n+y_n)$ and scalar multiplication for $c\in F$, $c(x_1,\dots ,x_n)=(cx_1,\dots ,cx_n)$.
**In general, we are looking for some addition and scalar multiplication structure over $V$, our vector space, that obeys "basic properties" (VS)**

**Exercise.**
Let $S$ be a set, $\mathcal{F}(S,F)$,where $F$ is a field, defines the set of functions from $S\rightarrow F$, $\mathcal{F}(S,F):=\{f:S\rightarrow F\}$.

1. Define addition in $\mathcal{F}(S,F)$ by $f,g\in\mathcal{F}(S,F)$: Let $(f+g):= \{S\in S\rightarrow f(s)+g(s)\}$.

2. Define scalar multiplication: If $c\in F$, $f\in \mathcal{F}(S,F)$, then $(cf):=\{s\in S\rightarrow cf(s)\}$

Then the two operations we defined are:
$$(f+g)(s)=f(s)+g(s)$$
$$(cf)(s)=cf(s)$$
***Ex**.* $F=\mathbb{R}$, $S=\{\hat{i},\hat{j}\}$
Every function looks like it sends $\hat{i}\rightarrow\mathbb{R}$ and $\hat{j}\rightarrow\mathbb{R}$, i.e. for any $\vec{x}\in\mathbb{R}^2$, you just get $\vec{x}=a\hat{i}+b\hat{j}=(a,b)$.
For an element $\vec{x}\in\mathcal{F}(S,F)$ all it does is assign a real number to each coordinate $\hat{i},\hat{j}$.

**Prove the following properties of vector spaces using the two defined operations (to verify that it is a vector space)**:

**Distributive**: We want to show
1. for any $f,g\in\mathcal{F}(S,F)$, $c\in F$, that $c(f+g)=(cf)+(cg)$.

**Proof:** For every $s\in S$, $(c(f+g))(s)=c(f+g)(s)=c[f(s)+g(s)]$, which is how we defined scalar multiplication. Then we apply the distributive property of the field since $f(s),g(s)\in F$, so $=cf(s)+cg(s)=(cf)(s)+(cg)(s)$. $\square$

2. if $f\in\mathcal{F}(S,F)$, $c,d\in F$, then $((c+d)f)=(cf)+(df)$.

...