>[!definition]
>A **basis** of a vector space $V$ is a (1) linearly independent subset $\beta\subseteq V$ that (2) spans $V$ $$\text{span}(\beta)=V$$

**Ex.** In $F^n$, let
$$e_1=\begin{pmatrix}1\\0\\0\\\vdots\\0\end{pmatrix},e_2=\begin{pmatrix}0\\1\\0\\\vdots\\0\end{pmatrix},\dots,e_n=\begin{pmatrix}0\\\vdots\\0\\0\\1\end{pmatrix}$$
Then $\{e_1,e_2,\dots,e_n\}$ is a basis for $F^n$ (called the **standard basis** for $F^n$).

**Ex.** $\emptyset$ is a basis for $\{\vec0\}$.

>[!theorem]
>Let $V$ be a vector space and $u_1,\dots,u_n$ be distinct vectors in $V$. Then $\beta=\{u_1,\dots,u_n\}$ is a basis for $V$ if and only if each $v\in V$ can be written *uniquely* as a linear combination $v=c_1u_1+\dots+c_nu_n$ of vectors in $\beta$.

**Proof:** 
$\implies$: Suppose $\beta=\{v_1,\dots,v_n\}$ is a basis for $V$. $\beta$ is a basis, so $\text{span}(\beta)=V$. So if $v\in V$, then $v\in\text{span}(\beta)\implies$ we can write $v=c_1v_1+\dots+c_nv_n$ for some $c_1,\dots,c_n\in F$. Suppose we can also write $v=b_1v_1+\dots+b_nv_n$ for some $b_1,\dots,b_v\in F$. Then we can subtract the two expressions for $\vec v$:
$$\vec0=\vec v-\vec v=(c_1-b_1)v_1+\dots+(c_n-b_n)v_n$$
Since $\beta$ is linearly independent, we have $c_1-b_1=0,c_2-b_2=0,\dots,c_n-b_n=0$ as there is only the trivial linear combination that equals $\vec0$. So $c_i=b_i$ for all $i$, and the expression for $v$ as a linear combination of vectors in $\beta$ is unique.
$\impliedby$: Conversely, suppose that for all $v\in V$, there is a unique expression of $v$ as a linear combination of vectors in $\beta$. Then $V\subseteq \text{span}(\beta)$, additionally $\beta\subseteq V$, so $\text{span}(\beta)\subseteq V$. Therefore $V=\text{span}(\beta)$, so $\beta$ spans $V$. 
To show $\beta$ is linearly independent, suppose that $c_1v_1+\dots+c_nv+n=\vec0$. Then since $\vec0=0v_1+\dots+0v_n$ as well, we have $c_i=0$ for all $i$, since the expression for $\vec0$ is unique by our assumption. So $\beta$ is linearly independent. 
Therefore $\beta$ is a basis. $\square$

**Ex.** $P_{\leq n}(R)$ with basis $\{1,x,x^2,\dots,x^n\}$.
1. Check linear independence
If $a_0(1)+a_1x+\dots+a_nx^n=0$ then for all $x\in \mathbb{R}$, $P(x)=\sum^n_{i=0}a_ix^i=0$.
2. Check that it spans

>[!theorem]
>If a vector space $V$ is spanned by a finite set $S$, then some subset of $S$ forms a basis for $V$.

**Proof:** If $S=\emptyset$ or $=\{0\}$ then $V=\text{span}(S)=\{\vec0\}$ which has basis $\emptyset$ so the result is true since $\emptyset\subseteq S$.
As such, we can assume that there is a non-zero element $v_1=\in S$. $\{v_1\}$ is linearly independent. Continue to add vectors (if possible) $v_2,v_3,\dots,v_k$ one at a time such that $\{v_1,\dots,v_k\}$ is linearly independent. $S$ is finite, so the process terminates, resulting in the set $\beta=\{v_1,\dots,v_k\}$. 
- If $\beta=S$, then $S$ is linearly independent (and span $\beta$) so $S$ is a basis.
- Otherwise, $\beta\neq S$ and adding any vector from $S$ to $\beta$ would make $\beta$ not linearly independent.  Let $v\in S$. If $v\in \beta$, then $v\in \text{span}(\beta)$. If $v\notin \beta$, then $\beta\cup\{v\}$ is linearly dependent. Therefore $v\in \text{span}(\beta)\implies S\subseteq \text{span}(\beta)\implies \text{span}(S)\subseteq\text{span}(\beta)$.

>[!theorem] Replacement Theorem
>Let $V$ be a vector space spanned by $G$ (say $G$ has $n$ elements) and let $L$ be a linearly independent subset of $V$ with $m$ elements. Then $m\leq n$ and there is a subset $H\subseteq G$ with $n-m$ vectors such that $L\cup H$ spans $V$.

***Proof (sketch):*** 
$m=0$ is fine.
Say we know how to do it for $m-1$ vectors, i.e. we have $L'\subseteq L$ $m-1$ vectors, $H'\subset G$ $n-(m-1)$ vectors, such that $H'\cup L'$ generate $V$, call the vector in $L\setminus L'$ $\vec v$. Since $H'\cup L'$ generate, $\vec v=a_1h_1+\dots+a_{h-m+1}h_{h-m+1}+b_1v_1+\dots+b_{m-1}v_{m-1}$ where $h_i\in H'$, $v_i\in L'$, $a,b\in F$. Because $L$ is independent, we must have at least one nonzero term in $H'$, say $a_1h_1$ ($\implies H'$ has $\geq1$ element, so $n-m+1\geq 1$, so $n\geq m$). Solve for $h_1$ and set $H=H'\setminus\{h_1\}$. Then $H\cup L$ generates $V$.

**Ex.** $V=\mathbb{R}^2, G=\{\begin{pmatrix}1\\1\end{pmatrix}, \begin{pmatrix}2\\2\end{pmatrix},\begin{pmatrix}1\\0\end{pmatrix}\}, L=\{\begin{pmatrix}3\\1\end{pmatrix}\}$, and $G$ spans $V$
By the replacement theorem $\implies$ any linearly independent subset of $\mathbb{R}^2$ has $\leq 3$ elements.

>[!theorem]
>Let $V$ be a vector space with finite basis. Then every basis for $V$ is finite and contains the same number of elements.

>[!definition]
>A vector space is finite dimensional if it has a finite basis. The **dimension** ($\text{dim}(V)$) of a finite dimensional vector space $V$ is the number of vectors in any basis of $V$. A vector space is infinite-dimensional if it isn't finite dimensional.

**Ex.**
$\text{dim}F^n=n$
$\text{dim}\{0\}=0$
$\text{dim}M_{m\times n}(F)=mn$
$\text{dim}F[x]=\infty$
$\text{dim}_\mathbb{C}\mathbb{C}=1$ (as a vector space over $\mathbb{C}$) $\rightarrow$ $\{1\}$
$\text{dim}_\mathbb{R}\mathbb{C}=2$ $\rightarrow \{1,i\}$

>[!theorem] Corollary
>Let $V$ be an $n$-dimensional vector space $\text{dim}V=n$.
>a) Any set that spans $V$ has at least $n$ elements and a spanning set with exactly $n$ elements is a basis for $V$.
>b) A linearly independent subset of $V$ has at most $n$ elements and it is a basis if it has exactly $n$ elements.
>c) If $L\subseteq V$ is a linearly independent subset, then there is a basis $\beta$ of $V$ such that $L\subseteq \beta$, and $L$ can be extended to a basis $\beta$.
>

***Proof (a):*** If $G$ is a finite spanning set, then there exists an $H\subseteq G$ such that $H$ is a basis. $H$ contains $n$ elements, so $G$ contains at least $n$ elements. Additionally, if $|G|=n$, then $G=H\implies$$G$ is a basis.

***Proof (b):*** The linearly independent set $L$ has $n$ vectors. Let $\beta$ be a basis of $V$. Then by the replacement theorem, there is an $H\subseteq\beta$ with $n-n=0$ elements such that $L\cup H$ spans $V$. $H=\emptyset$, so $L$ spans $V$ $\implies$ $L$ is a basis of $V$.

***Proof (c):*** Let $\beta$ be a basis and $L$ be linearly independent with $m\leq n$ elements. By the replacement theorem, there is an $H\subseteq\beta$ with $n-m$ elements such that $L\cup H$ spans $V$. So $L\cup H$ spans and has $\leq n$ elements $\implies$ by (a), $L\cup H$ has $n$ elements. Therefore $L\cup H$ is a basis.
 
>[!definition] Idea
>If $V$ is a finite-dimensional vector space and we know $\text{dim}(V)$, then to show $S\subseteq V$ is a basis we only need to show that
>1. $S$ has exactly $\dim(V)$ elements
>2. $S$ is linearly independent **OR** $S$ spans $V$.

>[!theorem]
>Let $W$ be a subspace of a finite-dimensional vector space $V$. Then $$\dim W\leq \dim V$$
>Moreover, if $\dim V=\dim W$, then $V=W$.
>**Cor.** If $W$ is a subspace of $V$, then any basis of $W$ can be extended to a basis of $V$.

