>[!theorem] 
>Let $V$ be an inner product space and $S=\{v_1,\dots,v_n\}$ orthogonal subset consisting of non-zero vectors. If $$y=\sum_{i=1}^na_iv_i\in \text{span}(S),$$ 
>then $$a_i=\dfrac{\langle y,v_i\rangle}{\| v_i\|^2}$$

***Proof:*** Suppose $y=\sum a_iv_i$. Then for all $j$,
$$\langle y,v_j\rangle = \langle \sum a_iv_i,v_j\rangle = \sum_i a_i\langle v_i,v_j\rangle$$
Since $S$ orthogonal then $\implies$ $\langle v_i,v_j\rangle=\begin{cases}\|v_j\|^2\qquad\text{if }i=j\\\\0\qquad\qquad\text{if }i\neq j\end{cases}$
$$\implies \langle y,v_j\rangle=a_j\|v_j\|^2\implies a_j=\dfrac{\langle y,v_j\rangle}{\|v_j\|^2}$$

>[!theorem] Corollary
>Let $V$ be an inner product space and $S\subseteq V$ an orthogonal set not containing $\vec0$. Then $S$ is linearly independent.

***Proof:*** If $\sum a_iv_i=\vec0$, the previous theorem implies $a_i=\langle 0,v_i\rangle/\|v_i\|^2=0$ for all $i$. Therefore $S$ must be linearly independent.

>[!theorem] Corollary
>Let $S=\{v_1,\dots,v_n\}\subseteq V$ be orthonormal. If $y\in \text{span}(S)$, then $$y=\sum_i \langle y,v_i\rangle v_i$$

### Gram-Schmidt Orthogonalization Process and Orthogonal Complements
Produces an orthogonal basis from any basis, which is then normalized to gett an **orthonormal basis**.
>[!theorem] Theorem (Gram-Schmidt)
>Let $V$ be an inner product space and $S=\{w_1,\dots,w_n\}$ be a linearly independent subset of $V$. Then define $S'=\{v_1,\dots,v_n\}$ as folllows:
>>- $v_1=w_1$
>>- $v_2=w_2-\dfrac{\langle w_2,v_1\rangle}{\|v_1\|^2}v_1$
>>- $v_k=w_k-\sum_{j=1}^{k-1}\dfrac{\langle w_k,v_j\rangle}{\|v_j\|^2}v_j$ for $k\leq 2$
>
>Then $S'$ is an **orthonormal subset** of $V$ with $\text{span}(S)=\text{span}(S')$.
>$\quad$

>[!theorem]
>If $V$ is a non-zero finite dimensional inner product space, then Gram-Schmidt guarantees that $V$ has an orthonormal basis. Suppose $\beta=\{v_1,\dots,v_n\}$ is an orthonormal basis, then each coordinate vector $x\in V$ has a unique decomposition $$x=\sum_{i=1}^n\langle x,v_i\rangle v_i$$
>Thus any vector is obtained by projecting onto each basis vector and summing the projections.

>[!theorem]
>Let $V$ be a finite dimensional inner product space with orthonormal basis $\beta=\{v_1,\dots,v_n\}$. For a linear transformation $T:V\rightarrow V$, $[T]_\beta^\beta$ is the matrix with $(i,j)$ entry given $\langle T(v_j),v_i\rangle$.

***Proof:*** Since $\beta$ is an orthonormal basis, $$T(v_j)=\langle T(v_j),v_1\rangle v_1+\dots+\langle T(v_j),v_n\rangle v_n$$ which gives us the $j$-th column:
$$[T(v_j)]_\beta=\begin{pmatrix}\langle T(v_j),v_1\rangle\\\vdots\\\langle T(v_j),v_n\rangle\end{pmatrix}$$

>[!definition]
>Let $S\subseteq V$ be a non-empty subset. The **orthogonal complement** of $S$ is $$S^{\perp}=\{x\in V\mid \langle x,y\rangle=0\quad\text{ for all }y\in S\}$$
>****
>**Ex.** $\{0\}^{\perp}=V,\qquad V^{\perp}=\{0\}$

>[!theorem]
>Let $W$ be a finite-dimensional subspace of $V$. Then for all $y\in V$, there are unique elements $w\in W$ and $w'\in W^{\perp}$ such that $y=w+w'$.

>[!theorem]
>Suppose $S=\{v_1,\dots,v_k\}$ is an orthonormal subset of an $n$-dimensional inner product space $V$ where $n\geq k$. Then
>1. $S$ can be extended to an orthonormal basis $\{v_1,\dots,v_k,v_{k+1},\dots,v_n\}$ of $V$.
>2. If $W=\text{span}(S)$, then $\{v_{k+1},\dots,v_n\}$ form an orthonormal basis for $W^\perp$.
>3. If $W$ is any subspace of $V$, then $$\dim V=\dim W+\dim W^\perp$$
>or, $V\subseteq W\oplus W^\perp$
>$\quad$

***Proof (sketch):***
1. Extend $S$ to basis of $V$, then apply Gram-Schmidt.
2. $\{v_{k+1},\dots,v_n\}$ is a subset of a basis so it is linearly independent. To show that it spans $W^\perp$,
	If $x\in V$, then $x=\sum_{i=1}^n\langle x,v_i\rangle v_i$.
	If $x\in W^\perp$, then $\langle x,v_i\rangle=0$ for $i\leq k$.
	So $x=\sum_{i=k+1}^n\langle x,v_i\rangle v_i\in \text{span}\{v_{k+1},\dots,v_n\}$
	
3. $\dim V=\dim W+\dim W^\perp=(k)+(n-k)=n$

>[!theorem]
>$S^\perp$ is always a subspace.
