# 5.1 Eigenvalues and Eigenvectors
>[!definition]
>Let $V$ be a finite dimensional vector space and $T:V\rightarrow V$ be linear. We say $T$ is **diagonalizable** if there is an ordered bases $\beta$ for $V$ such that $[T]_\beta$ is a diagonal matrix.
>****
>*Matrix version*: A matrix $A\in M_{n\times n}(F)$ is **diagonalizable** if the linear transformation $T(x)=Ax$ is.

Suppose $\beta=\{v_1,\dots,v_n\}$ is an ordered bases for $V$ such that $$[T]_\beta^\beta=\begin{pmatrix}
\lambda_1&0&\dots\\
0&\lambda_2&\dots\\
&&\ddots\\
&&&\lambda_n\end{pmatrix}$$ is diagonal, with 
$$T(v_i)=\lambda_iv_i,\qquad[T(v_i)]_\beta=\lambda_ie_i=\begin{pmatrix}0\\\vdots\\\lambda_i\\\vdots\\0\end{pmatrix}$$

>[!definition]
>Let $T:V\rightarrow V$ be linear. A non-zero vector $v\in V$ such that there is a scalar $\lambda\in F$ such that $$T(v)=\lambda v$$ is called an **eigenvector** for $T$. The scalar $\lambda$ is the **eigenvalue** corresponding to $v$.
>****
>*Matrix version*: For matrices $A\in M_{n\times n}(F)$, a non-zero vector $v$ is an **eigenvector** if $$Av=\lambda v$$ for some scalar $\lambda$, which is the **eigenvalue** corresponding to $v$.
>****
>*An eigenvector is a non-zero vector such that $T$'s action on it is only scaling by a factor.*

# 5.2 Diagonalizability
>[!theorem]
>$T:V\rightarrow V$ is diagonalizable if and only if there is an ordered basis $\beta=\{v_1,\dots,v_n\}$ of eigenvectors  $$[T]_\beta=\begin{pmatrix}\lambda_1\\&\ddots\\&&\ddots\\&&&\lambda_n\end{pmatrix}$$ that is diagonal with entries given by the eigenvalues.
>****
>*Matrix version*: $A\in M_{n\times n}(F)$ is diagonalizable if and only if there is a basis $\beta=\{v_1,\dots,v_n\}$ of eigenvectors. Let $Q=$ matrix with $i$-th column $v_i$:
>$$Q=\begin{pmatrix}[v_1]&\dots&[v_n]\end{pmatrix}$$ 
>This is the change-of-basis matrix from the basis of eigenvectors to the standard basis.
>Then $$A=QDQ^{-1}\quad\text{where}\quad D=\begin{pmatrix}\lambda_1\\&\ddots\\&&\ddots\\&&&\lambda_n\end{pmatrix}$$

Inverse of a 2x2 matrix:
$$\begin{pmatrix}a&b\\c&d\end{pmatrix}^{-1}=\dfrac{1}{ad-bc}\begin{pmatrix}d&-b\\-c&a\end{pmatrix}$$

### How to find eigenvalues/eigenvectors
>[!theorem]
>Let $A\in M_{n\times n}(F)$. Then $\lambda\in F$ is an eigenvalue if and only if $$\det (A-\lambda I)=0$$

***Proof:*** $\lambda$ is an eigenvalue if and only if there is a non-zero vector $v$ such that $Av=\lambda v=\lambda Iv\iff (A-\lambda I)v=0$. 
So $\ker(A-\lambda I)\neq\{0\}\iff A-\lambda I$ is not invertible (or, $T(x)=(A-\lambda I)x$ is not invertible) $\iff \det(A-\lambda I)=0$

>[!definition]
>Let $A\in M_{n\times n}(F)$. The **characteristic polynomial** of $A$ is $$X_A(t)=\det (A-tI)$$ and the eigenvalues are the roots of this polynomial.

>[!definition]
>Let $T:V\rightarrow V$ be linear and $\beta$ be *any* ordered basis for $V$. The determinant of $T$ is $\det T=\det ([T]_\beta^\beta)$ and the characteristic polynomial is $X(t)=X_{[T]_\beta}(t)=\det([T]_\beta-\lambda I)$.

Claim: Similar matrices have the same determinant
$A=QBQ^{-1}$
$\det A=\det Q \det B \det Q^{-1}$

>[!theorem]
>**Properties of the characteristic polynomial $X_A(t), A\in M_{n\times n}(F)$:**
>1. $X_A(t)$ is a polynomial of degree $n$, and the leading coefficient is $(-1)^n$
>$$X_A(t)=(-1)^nt^n+\text{lower degree terms}$$
>2. $A\in M_{n\times n}$ has at most $n$ distinct eigenvalues
> $\quad$

>[!definition]
>Let $A\in M_{n\times n}(F)$ and let $\lambda$ be an eigenvalue. A non-zero vector $v\in F^n$ is an **eigenvector** with the eigenvalue $\lambda$ if and only if $v\in \ker(A-\lambda I)$.

>[!definition]
>Let $A\in M_{n\times n}(F)$ and $\lambda\in F$ be  an eigenvalue. The $\lambda$-**eigenspace** of $A$, denoted $E_\lambda(A)$, is $$E_\lambda(A)=\ker (A-\lambda I)=\{x\in F^n\mid Ax=\lambda x\}$$
>This is the space of all $\lambda$ eigenvectors and the zero vector.
> ****
>*Note:* Finding eigenspaces $\iff$ finding the kernel of $A-\lambda I$

We can find the basis for each eigenspace and then put them together. However, we don't always end up with a basis for $V$.

***What can go wrong?***
- Not enough eigenvalues
- Not enough eigenvectors

>[!definition]
>A polynomial $f(t)\in F[t]$ **splits** over the field $F$ if there exist scalars (don't have to be unique) $c,a_1,a_2,\dots,a_n\in F$ such that
>$$f(t)=c(t-a_1)(t-a_2)\dots(t-a_n)$$
>splits into linear factors.
>****
>$x^2-1$ splits over $\mathbb{R}$: $x^2-1=(x-1)(x+1)$
>$x^2-2x+1=(x-1)^2$ splits over $\mathbb{R}$: $(x-1)(x-1)$
>$x^2+1$ splits over $\mathbb{C}$: $(x+1)(x-1)$ but not $\mathbb{R}$

>[!theorem]
>Let $T:V\rightarrow V$ be linear, if $T$ is diagonalizable then $X_T(t)$ splits.

***Proof:*** If $T$ is diagonalizable then there exists a basis $\beta$ such that 
$$[T]_\beta=\begin{pmatrix}\lambda_1&&0\\&\ddots\\0&&\lambda_n\end{pmatrix}$$
Then $X_T(t)=(\lambda_1-t)\dots(\lambda_n-t)$ splits.

>[!definition]
>Let $A\in M_{n\times n}(F)$ and $\lambda\in F$ be an eigenvalue. The **algebraic multiplicity** of $\lambda$ is the largest integer $k$ such that $(t-\lambda)^k$ is a factor of $X_A(t)$. The **geometric multiplicity** of $\lambda$ is $\dim(E_\lambda(A))$.

>[!theorem]
>Let $T:V\rightarrow V$ be linear and $\lambda\in F$ be an eigenvalue. Then $$1\leq\text{geom. multiplicity of $\lambda$}\leq\text{alg. multiplicity of $\lambda$}$$

***Proof:*** (idea) Extend the basis of $E_\lambda(A)$ to a basis $\beta$ of $V$, then take the characteristic polynomial $X_{[T]_\beta}$
	
>[!theorem]
Let $T:V\rightarrow V$ be linear and $V$ a vector space over $F$ such that $X_T(t)$ splits over $F$. Let $\lambda_1,\dots,\lambda_k$ be the distinct values. Then
>1.  is diagonalizable if and only if the algebraic multiplicity of $\lambda_i =$ the geometric multiplicity of $\lambda_i$ for every eigenvalue $\lambda_i$
>2. If $T$ is diagonalizable and $\beta_i$ is a basis for $E_{\lambda_i}(T_\lambda)$, then $\beta_i\cup\beta_2\cup\dots\cup\beta_k$ is a basis for $V$ consisting of eigenvectors of $T$.
>$\quad$

>[!definition]
>A **linear operator** on $V$ is a linear $T:V\rightarrow V$.

>[!theorem]
>Let $T:V\rightarrow V$ be linear and let $\lambda_1,\dots,\lambda_k$ be distinct eigenvalues of $T$. If $S_i$ is a finite linearly independent subset of an eigenspace $E_{\lambda_T}(T)$ then $S_1\cup\dots\cup S_k$ is linearly independent. 
>*AKA eigenvalues from different eigenspaces are linearly independent.*

>[!theorem]
>Let $A\in M_{n\times n}(F)$. If $A$ has $n$ distinct eigenvalues, then $A$ is diagonalizable.

***Proof:*** (sketch) Each eigenvalue has alg mult 1, then $1\leq\text{geom}\leq\text{alg}=1$ for each eigenvalue.

### Application: Matrix Powers
Given $A\in M_{n\times n}(F)$, we can compute $A^k$ using diagonalization.
If $D=\begin{pmatrix}\lambda_1&0\\0&\lambda_2\end{pmatrix}$, then $D^k=\begin{pmatrix}\lambda_1^k&0\\0&\lambda_2^k\end{pmatrix}$. This works for every diagonalizable matrix.

If $A$ is diagonalizable with $A=QDQ^{-1}$,
$$A^k=(QDQ^{-1})(QDQ^{-1})\dots(QDQ^{-1})=QD^kQ^{-1}$$
Similarly, if $T:V\rightarrow V$ is linear,
$$T^k=T\circ T\circ \dots\circ T$$
