There are lots of ways to span $\mathbb{R}^3$. How can we determine if there are vectors that don't contribute to the span?

>[!definition]
>Let $S$ be a subset of vector space $V$, $S\subseteq V$. $S$ is **linearly dependent** if there are vectors $v_1,\dots ,v_n\in S$ and scalars $c_1,\dots ,c_n\in F$ that are not all zero (at least one $c_i\neq 0$) -- in other words, there is a non-trivial linear combination of the vectors -- such that $c_1v_1+\dots +c_nv_n=\vec0$.

>[!definition] Cor.
>If $\vec0\in S$, then $S$ is linearly dependent. Since $1\cdot \vec0=\vec0$, all other scalars can be 0.

>[!definition]
>A set $S\subseteq V$ is **linearly independent** if it is not linearly dependent. Namely, $S\subseteq V$ is linearly dependent if and only if for all $v_1,\dots ,v_n\in S$ and $c_1,\dots ,c_n\in F$, if the linear combination $c_1v_1+\dots +c_nv_n=\vec 0$ then for all $1 \leq i\leq n$, $c_i=0$. In other words, only the trivial linear combination equals 0.

**Ex.** Show $\{\begin{pmatrix}1\\1\end{pmatrix},\begin{pmatrix}1\\2\end{pmatrix}\}\subseteq \mathbb{R}^2$ is linearly independent.
If $c_1\begin{pmatrix}1\\1\end{pmatrix}+c_2\begin{pmatrix}1\\2\end{pmatrix}=\vec0$, then $\begin{cases}c_1+c_2=0\\c_1+2c_2=0\end{cases}\implies c_2=0,c_1=0$
$\implies c_1=c_2=0$, so the set is linearly independent.

>[!theorem]
>Let $V$ be a vector space and $S_1\subseteq S_2\subseteq V$ be subsets.
>1. If $S_1$ is linearly dependent, then $S_2$ is linearly dependent.
>2. If $S_2$ is linearly independent, then $S_1$ is linearly independent.

**Proof:**
1. If $\sum c_iv_i=\vec0$ for $c_i\in F$ and $v_1\in S_1$ is not all zero (since $S_1$ is *LD*), then $v_i\in S_2$ since $S_1\subseteq S_2$, so $\sum c_iv_i=\vec0$ is in $S_2$ as well. Then $S_2$ is also *LD*.
2. Use contrapositive...

>[!theorem]
>Let $S$ be a linearly independent subset of a vector space $V$ and let $v\in V$ be a vector that is not in $S$, $v\notin S$. Then $S\cup \{v\}$ is linearly dependent if and only if $v\in \text{span}(S)$.

**Proof:**
1. $\implies$: If $S\cup \{v\}$ is linearly dependent, then there exist $u_i,\dots ,u_n\in S\cup\{v\}$ and $c_1,\dots ,c_n\in F$ not all zero such that $c_1u_1+\dots +c_nv_n=\vec0$. Since $S$ is linearly dependent, there must be a $u_i=v$ with $c_i\neq 0$. So $c_1v+c_2u_2+\dots +c_nu_n=\vec0\implies c_1v=-(c_2u_2+\dots +c_nu_n)$. If $c_1=0$ then $c_2u_2 +\dots +c_nu_n=\vec0$ which would contradict the linear independence of $S$, so then it must be true that $c_1\neq 0$. Then, $v=c_1^{-1}(-c_2u_2-\dots -c_nu_n)=-\frac{c_2}{c_1}u_2-\dots -\frac{c_n}{c_1}u_n$ and so $v\in \text{span}(S)$.
2. $\impliedby$: Conversely, if $v\in \text{span}(S)$ then there are $v_1,\dots ,v_n\in S$ and $c_1,\dots ,c_n\in F$ such that $v=c_1u_1+\dots+c_nu_n$. So $1v-c_1u_1-\dots-c_nu_n=\vec0$. So $S\cup\{v\}$ is linearly independent.

**Ex.** Show that for two independent sets, if $S_1=\{w_1,\dots,w_n\}$, $S_2=\{v_1,\dots,v_m\}$. Then $S_1\cup S_2$ is independent if and only if $\text{span}(S_1)\cup \text{span}(S_2)=\{0\}$.
**Proof.** 
$\implies$ We want to show that if $S_1\cup S_2$ is linearly independent, then $\text{span}(S_1)\cup \text{span}(S_2)=\{0\}$.
Because $S_1\cup S_2$ is linearly independent, $a_1w_1+\dots+a_nw_n+b_1v_1+\dots+b_mv_m=0$. Suppose for the sake of contradiction that there is a vector $\in\text{span}(S_1)\cup\text{span}(S_2)$ that is not the zero vector. Then for some $w_i\in S_1$ and $v_i\in S_2$ we have $w_i=v_i$. Therefore $0w_1+\dots+w_i+\dots+0w_n+0v_1+\dots+(-1)v_i+\dots+0v_m=0$ for coefficients that are not all 0, contradicting that $S_1\cup S_2$ is linearly independent.
$\impliedby$ ...

