## Definitions

>[!definition]
>A **set** is a collection of things called the **elements** of the set. When an object X is an element of the set A, we write $x\in A$ ("x is in A")

*ex.*
* The set of integers, $\mathbb{Z}$ (all whole numbers, pos/neg/zero)
* The set of rational numbers, $\mathbb{Q}$ (numbers of the form $\frac{a}{b}$, $a,b \in \mathbb{Z}$, $b \neq 0$)
* The set of real numbers $\mathbb{R}$ (all numbers on the number line)

>[!definition] 
>We say that a set A is a **subset** of another set B if each element of A is also an element of B. We write $A\subset B$ ("A is contained in B") or $A\subseteq B$.

>[!definition]
>The empty set $\emptyset$ is the set with no elements.
>$$\emptyset=\{\}$$
>$\emptyset \subseteq S$ for every set $S$.
## Proving things about sets:
Often we want to prove statements of the form "for all elements $x\in A$, some property $P(x)$ is true".
>e.g. to prove $A\subseteq B$, we have to show that for every $a\in A$, we have that $a\in B$.

**Strategy:**
1. Suppose $x\in A$ is arbitrary
2. Prove $P(x)$

**Example:** For three sets $A, B, C$, if $A\subset B$, $B\subset C$, then $A\subset C$.
***Proof:*** Assume that $A, B, C$ are sets with $A\subset B, B\subset C$. Suppose $a\in A$ is arbitrary. We have to show $a\in C$. Since $a\in B$ and $A\subset B$, $a\in B$. Since $a\in B$ and $B\subset C$, $a\in C$. Since $a$ was chosen arbitrarily, $A\subset C$. $\square$
## How to define new sets?
Write down all the elements:

> e.g. {1, 3, 7} is the set with elements 1, 3, and 7

**Set builder notation**: Describe all elements with some defining property
$\{ x\in X \mid P(x) \}$ is the set of all elements of $X$ such that $P(X)$ is true.

> e.g. $\{ x\in Z \mid x \text{ is even} \}$ is the set of all even integers.

We can also construct new sets from existing sets. Given two sets $A, B$, we can form:

>[!definition]
>* The **union** $A \cup B = \{ x \mid x\in A \text{ or } x\in B \}$.
>*Note that sets do not track multiplicities, they only care whether something belongs in the set or not.*
>* The **intersection** $A \cap B = \{ x \mid x\in A \text{ and } x\in B\}$.
>* The **set difference** $A\setminus B$ (or $A - B$) $= \{ x \mid x\in A \text{ and } x\notin B\}$

**Example:** For sets $A, B, C$, if $A\subset B\cup C$, then $A\setminus B \subset C$.
***Proof:*** Suppose $A,B,C$ are sets with $A\subset B\cup C$. We need to show that for every arbitrary $x\in A\setminus B$, $x\in C$. $x\in A\setminus B$ means that $x\in A$ and $x \notin B$. Since $x\in A$ and $A\subset B\cup C$, we have $x\in B\cup C$, so $x\in B$ or $x\in C$. We know $x \notin B$ so we have to be in the case where $x\in C$. That is what we needed to show, so $A\setminus B \subset C$. $\square$

### Strategy: Contradiction
"$\forall x, P(x)$" is false if $\exists x$ such that $P(x)$ is false. 

**Example:** Prove that $\forall x\in \mathbb{Q}, x+\sqrt{2} \notin \mathbb{Q}$ ($\sqrt{2}\notin\mathbb{Q}$ assumed).
***Proof:*** Suppose there was an element $x\in\mathbb{Q}$ such that $x+\sqrt{2}\in\mathbb{Q}$. Then, $x+\sqrt2=\frac{a}{b}$ for some $a,b\in\mathbb{Z}$, so $\sqrt{2}=\frac{a}{b}-x$ but $x\in \mathbb{Q} \Rightarrow x=\frac{a'}{b'}\Rightarrow \sqrt{2}=\frac{a}{b}-\frac{a'}{b'}\in \mathbb{Q}$, which is a contradiction. $\square$

### Strategy: To prove something of the form $P\Leftrightarrow Q$ ("P is true if and only if Q is true"):
Show that $P\Rightarrow Q$ and $Q\Rightarrow P$.

**Example**: Show $\{n\in \mathbb{Z} \mid n \text{ is even} \} = \{ n\in \mathbb{Z} \mid n^2 \text{ is even} \}$.
***Proof***: Last time we proved that $n$ is even $\Rightarrow n^2$ is even. So $\{ n \mid n \text{ even} \} \subseteq \{ n \mid n^2 \text{ even} \}$. Also proved $n^2$ even $\Rightarrow n$ even (by contrapositive). The sets are subsets of each other. So the sets are equal. $\square$
### Strategy: To prove something of the form $(P \text{ or } Q) \Rightarrow R$,
Break up into cases:
1. Suppose $P$, prove $R$
2. Suppose $Q$, prove $R$

**Example**: Let $A,B,C$ be sets $A\cap (B\cup C) \subset(A \cap B)\cup C$.
***Proof***: Let $A$, $B$, $C$ be three sets, and $x\in A\cap(B\cup C)$ arbitrary. This means that $x\in A$, and $x\in B$ or $x\in C$.
Case 1: if $x\in B$, then $x\in A\cap B$, so $x\in(A\cap B)\cup C)$.
Case 2: if $x\in C$, then $x\in (A\cap B)\cup C$.
So in either case, $x\in (A\cap B)\cup C$, so we're done. $\square$
# W1-D1
### Truth tables

| $P$ | $Q$ | $P\land Q$ | $P\lor Q$ | $P\implies Q$ | $P\iff Q$ |
| --- | --- | ---------- | --------- | ------------- | --------- |
| T   | T   | T          | T         | T             | T         |
| T   | F   | F          | T         | F             | F         |
| F   | T   | F          | T         | T             | F         |
| F   | F   | F          | F         | T             | T         |
To show that $P\implies Q$ is equivalent to $\lnot Q\implies \lnot P$ (the contrapositive), we can show that their truth tables are identical. 

### De Morgan's Laws
>[!theorem] 
>1. $S\setminus(A\cup B) =S\setminus A \cap S\setminus B$
>2. $S\setminus (A\cap B)=S\setminus A\cup S\setminus B$

>[!theorem]
>1. $\lnot (P\lor Q)\iff (\lnot P \land \lnot Q)$
>2. $\lnot (P \land Q) \iff (\lnot P \lor \lnot Q)$

>[!proof] Prove De Morgan's Laws (#1)
> Prove: $S$ is a set, $A,B\subseteq S$ are subsets, show $S\setminus (A \cup B) = S\setminus A\cap S\setminus B$.
> 1. First show that $S\setminus(A\cup B) \subseteq S\setminus A \cap S\setminus B$.
> For an arbitrary $s\in S\setminus (A\cup B)$, with $s\notin A\cup B$, we claim $s\notin A$ and $s\notin B$.
> If $s\in A$ then $s\in A\cup B$, which contradicts $s\notin A\cup B$. So, $s\notin A$.
> If $s\in B$ then $s\in A\cup B$, which contradicts $s\notin A\cup B$. So, $s\notin B$.
> (Because $s\in S$ and $s\notin A$, and $A\subseteq S$, then $s\in S\setminus A$, and because $s\in S$ and $s\notin B$, and $B\subseteq S$, then $s\in S\setminus B$. Then since $s\in S\setminus A$ and $s\in S \setminus B$, $s\in S\setminus A \cap S\setminus B$.)
> $\Rightarrow s \notin A$ and $s \notin B$, so $s\in S\setminus A\cap S\setminus B$.
> We have showed that $s \in S\setminus (A\cup B) \Rightarrow s\in S\setminus A\cap S\setminus B$ , so we conclude $S\setminus (A\cup B) \subseteq S\setminus A \cap S\setminus B$.
> 
> 2. Next, show $S\setminus A\cap S\setminus B\subseteq S\setminus (A\cap B)$.
> ...

**Example**: Given $A,B,C\subseteq S$ for some $S$, prove $(A\cup B)\cap C=(A\cap C)\cup (B\cap C)$.
***Proof:***
1. First, we'll show $(A\cup B)\cap C\subseteq (A\cap C)\cup (B\cap C)$.
Take $s\in (A\cup B)\cap C$ and show that $s\in (A\cap C)\cup (B\cap C)$. Suppose not, $s\notin (A\cap C)\cup (B\cap C)$, meaning $s\notin (A\cap C)$ and $s\notin (B\cap C)$. Want to show $s\notin (A\cup B)\cap C$ and get a contradiction. $s\notin (A\cap C)$ means that either $s\notin A$ or $s\notin C$ is true. If $s\notin C$ were true, this would contradict $s\in (A\cup B) \cap C$, so $s\notin A$ must be true. In the same way, $s\notin (A\cap B)$ means that $s\notin B$ must be true. Because $s\notin A$ and $s\notin B$, then $s\notin A\cup B$. But since $s\notin (A\cup B)$, this contradicts $s\notin (A\cup B) \cap C$. Therefore if $s\in (A\cup B) \cap C$ then $s\in (A\cap C)\cup (B\cap C)$ must be true. Now we can conclude $(A\cup B)\cap C\subseteq (A\cap C)\cup (B\cap C)$.

2. Show $(A\cap C)\cup (B\cap C)\subseteq (A\cup B)\cap C$.
...

### Negation
"A and B" $\rightarrow$ "not A and not B"

"there exists a $y\in \mathbb{R}$ such that for all $x\in \mathbb{R}$, $y=x^2$" 
**negate:**
"for all $y\in \mathbb{R}$ there exists some $x\in \mathbb{R}$ such that $y\neq x^2$"

### Contrapositive
Switch two statements and negate both.

**Example**
"if $x$ and $y$ are rational numbers then $x+y$ is rational"
*write the contrapositive:*
not ($x+y$ is rational) $\implies$ not ($x$ and $y$ are rational)
= $x+y$ is irrational $\implies$ either $x$ or $y$ is irrational
= "if $x+y$ is irrational, then either $x$ or $y$ is irrational"

**Example**
"if $x^2=4$ then $x=2$"
*contrapositive*:
not ($x=2$) $\implies$ not ($x^2 =4$)
= $x\neq 2 \implies x^2 \neq 4$
= "if $x\neq 2$ then $x^2\neq 4$"

| Want to prove       | What to show                       |
| ------------------- | ---------------------------------- |
| $A=B$               | $A\subseteq B$ and $B \subseteq A$ |
| $A\subseteq B$      | $a\in A \rightarrow a\in B$        |
| $s\in A\cap B$      | $s\in A$ and $s\in B$              |
| $s\in S\setminus A$ | $s\notin A, (s\in S)$              |

>[!definition]
>Two sets $A,B$ are equal if they have the same elements, i.e. $A\subseteq B$ and $B\subseteq A$.
### How to prove $A=B$:
**Strategy 1**
1. Prove $A\subseteq B$
2. Prove $B\subseteq A$

**Strategy 2**
1. Prove that $x\in A \iff x\in B$ for objects $x$.

**Ex.** For $A,B,C$ sets, $(A\setminus B)\setminus C=A\setminus (B\cup C)$.
***Proof:*** For any $x$, $x\in (A\setminus B)\setminus C \iff x\in A\setminus B$ and $x\notin C$
$\iff x\in A$ and $x\notin B$ and $x\notin C$$
$\iff x\in A$ and $x\notin B\cup C$
$\iff x\in A\setminus (B\cup C)$
So $x\in (A\setminus B)\setminus C\iff x\in A\setminus (B\cup C)$ for any $x$, so $(A\setminus B)\setminus C=A\setminus (B\cup C)$. $\square$
### How to prove $A=\emptyset$:
**Strategy:**
1. Suppose there is some $x\in A$.
2. Prove a contradiction.

**Ex.**  For sets $A,B,$ $A\subseteq B \iff A\setminus B=\emptyset$ .
*Strategy*: To prove $P\iff Q$, prove $P\implies Q$ then $Q\implies P$.
***Proof:***
$\implies$: Suppose $A,B$ are sets with $A\subseteq B$. We want to show $A\setminus B=\emptyset$. Suppose for the sake of contradiction that there is some $x\in A\setminus B$. This means $x\in A$ and $x\notin B$. Since $x\in A$ and $A\subseteq B$, $x\in B$. Now we have $x\in B$ and $x\notin B$. This is impossible, so there cannot be an element of $A\setminus B$, so $A\setminus B=\emptyset$.
$\impliedby$: Suppose $A,B$ are sets with $A\setminus B=\emptyset$. We need to show $A\subseteq B$. Let $x\in A$ be arbitrary. We need to show $x\in B$. Suppose for the sake of contradiction that $x\notin B$. Since $x\in A$ and $x\notin B$, we have $x\in A\setminus B$. But $A\setminus B$ is empty, this is a contradiction. Thus $x\in B$. Since $x\in A$ was chosen arbitrarily, $A\subseteq B$. $\square$
